welcome to newsletter number eight and
this is a particularly long newsletter
and so i'm doing that thing which i kind
of promised i wouldn't do firstly going
over time when it comes to these
newsletters and secondly releasing it in
my normal podcast feed so i'm violating
my own laws here well
that's because it's been a busier than
usual fortnight and so the newsletter
here is a little later than usual and
the next podcast is likewise running a
little later than usual somewhat delayed
but don't worry we're getting back on
track that podcast to come is a
technical one lots of science and heavy
on the details
it's a reflection on the next set of
readings from kiara marletto's book the
science of canon can't where i'm up to
chapter six which is called work and
heat
this is a chapter very specifically
about a well-known area of physics which
is the sub-topic called thermodynamics
thermodynamics is a particularly
interesting area of physics because
within it we have something called the
first law of thermodynamics which is
energy conservation perhaps one of the
first laws of physics learned by
students in school it is something most
people are at least familiar with even
if they cannot provide a precise
definition but the fact is most people
have heard of the law which is called
energy conservation but as chiara and
david say that law is actually deeper
than what other laws might be and so it
can be called a principle it is
something that other laws that exists or
even might be discovered in the future
must conform to a purported law that
violates energy conservation has its
work cut out for it and the fact is it's
likely refuted at that very first hurdle
or in other words if your newly
discovered law violates the principle of
conservation of energy then that itself
is a criticism of your law and it
remains a valid criticism absent a good
explanation of why the principle of
energy conservation does not or should
not hold now the second law of
thermodynamics is something else again
this law is a strange one in physics
because no one knows how to derive it
from anything more fundamental as they
tend to do with other laws the history
of science is kind of replete with this
kind of thing we have these things
called let's say kepler's laws just as
an example and they govern planetary
motion approximately speaking now
without going into details about what
kepler's laws are the fact is they were
expressed by johannes kepler as three
distinct laws in around 1619 which was
about six decades before isaac newton
published his universal law of
gravitation
now the latter the universal law of
gravitation is a
deeper law at least it was seen this way
while classical physics still held sway
and from it you can derive kepler's laws
which are more emergent there's like
special cases of the application of the
universal law of gravitation and of
course now we have general relativity as
our deepest theory of gravity so we can
make a few assumptions that might not
strictly be true but so far as
approximations go we can derive newton's
law so-called law of gravity and hence
kepler's laws now of course truth be
told the word law here is a misnomer if
we're going to have the general theory
of relativity but newton's law of
gravity we've got a bit of a problem we
just have to understand that the word
law doesn't mean enshrined forever as
the gospel truth these are all
misconceptions to remember but that's a
whole other topic we could easily get
sidetracked by and i'm not going to
right now my point here is that in
theory well that's ambiguous in
principle well that's even worse my
point is that in science when we find a
deeper theory we can show
how the higher emergent laws or theories
can be derived as approximations in some
cases to a deeper law or sometimes as
laws that simply fall out as nothing but
logical consequences of the deeper law
but the second law of thermodynamics is
not like this so far as we know yet
the second law of thermodynamics cannot
be derived from quantum theory at least
we don't know how the theory of how mata
behaves in terms of what the particles
are actually doing such that there's an
irreversible process which is what the
second law requires the second law seems
to give a so-called arrow of time which
some physicists are fond of talking
about namely the second law describes
how things tend in this direction and
not that direction unlike with dynamical
laws of motion or other dynamical laws
of motion or in terms of general
relativity which is laws governing space
time the classic example is that we
witness eggs smashing onto the floor
once they're dropped but never the piece
is gathering themselves up again into a
whole egg why can't quantum theory and
general relativity explain this there
seems to be nothing in our account of
time for example in the theory of space
time which is general relativity there
is nothing in this theory that is able
to explain why in our real world in
terms of time things tend to move in the
direction of increased disorder or the
technical term is entropy or towards
broken eggs rather than reformed once
cracked eggs put it how you like so the
second law has always been this kind of
empirical law which is to say we observe
it to hold and never to be violated but
as to why exactly we don't know the
second law is a statement of the break
in symmetry between the past and the
future a symmetry that is inherent in
all other physical laws they are said to
be reversible or time symmetric the
future resembles the past when it comes
to dynamical laws of motion whether
these laws are classical or quantum
but the future does not resemble the
past as we know yesterday is not the
same as today and tomorrow will be
different again
but why
in terms of physics at the fundamental
level we don't know something to do with
the second law
but what exactly what is happening with
the particles that in all other
circumstances are just obeying dynamical
laws of motion that make no distinction
between motion in this direction that
happens to be forward in time and motion
in that direction which just so happens
to be backward in time or put another
way
if we watch some ensemble of particles
interacting let's keep it simple and
make it just two particles crashing into
each other
no physicist or anyone else for that
matter who watched a movie of such a
collision such an interaction between
two particles presumably this would be a
very high frame rate electron microscope
super high resolution video of particles
that are very massive by the way
colliding neither the physicist nor
anyone else would be able to say whether
you had reversed the video or not is it
running backwards or forwards it may as
well be forward in time as back in time
this is utterly unlike a video we take
of a car crash or anything else in the
macro world but particle interactions
what is hiding in that thought
experiment video that governs the
tendency towards disorder or increasing
entropy now what chiara has done and
what she explains in her book is how
constructor theory might be a new way of
approaching the second law in terms of
what is possible and not possible so
we'll be tackling that in the podcast
rather than me trying to explain it here
right now
i think i've already said too much
my sense is that the podcast will
stretch over at least two episodes so
i'll leave all of that talk for the
podcast which i assume will be out next
week now on to another topic almost
entirely one of my favorite politicians
had something to say this week which is
a strange phrase for me to utter because
i don't tend to have favorite
politicians indeed i have something
between a healthy cynicism and a deep
skepticism about all politicians as a
working hypothesis i'm kind of concerned
about people who seek such a position
because what they're seeking is power
over their fellows so so long as they
express great skepticism and have a good
explanation of their skepticism about
seeking power then i'm more inclined to
be favorable towards them but there can
be exceptions to
this kind of cynicism about politicians
in general one would be of course
winston churchill because he was the
right man at the right time that the
free world and the enlightenment needed
to take power to have power and to wield
that power at a time when the worst
possible kinds of politicians had risen
through the ranks elsewhere in the world
it's a shame this needs to be said these
days and presumably not to my audience
here and now but
churchill more than any other person
should be the one credited with defeat
of german fascism and hence adolf hitler
and the nazis or perhaps more precisely
i should say
won the second world war in europe and
drove german fascism from power i don't
think european fascism was entirely
destroyed in truth by any measure but it
was very much reduced in its potency and
minimized or sidelined as a significant
political force for some time
even if the underlying philosophies that
drove it have persisted
but that's another matter churchill was
also praised by karl popper as a
philosopher as an epistemologist in
particular and this is something i've
mentioned before on topcast and so for
that reason too
churchill is near the top of my list
but as to living politicians well
there's no one in australia to speak of
that particularly impresses me and right
now we are almost at the end of the
australian federal election campaign so
we've had more than the usual number of
political heads on screens talking at us
but in the uk
daniel hannon ever since i first
encountered him delivering a speech
somewhere or other on youtube i think it
was likely about brexit he's always
struck me as being excellent he speaks
clearly he answers questions directly
and he has a deep understanding of the
relevant history philosophy and culture
of liberty wealth creation the
enlightenment and so on all of that good
stuff he wrote a book called inventing
freedom which i really should add to the
list of the books i discuss here so i
have almost nothing but praise for lord
hanuman of kin claire as he now is at
the moment being in the house of lords
he's not shy about standing up to the
excesses of the left side of politics
and the right side of politics he was
correct for example to recently pen an
article that was titled why are we so
afraid of sex differences in education
this
is an important relevant issue the issue
is basically that policy makers see it
as a problem
that boys choose physics more often than
girls do for example now when i've
worked in education it was always seen
as a problem for girls girls were
supposed to choose physics more often
than they did and more engineering more
often and more mathematics more often
and the underlying assumption was that
the reason they didn't was something to
do with discrimination or that vacuous
term
unconscious bias
now the fact boys chose psychology and
sociology and even artistic and dramatic
subjects at a rate lower than girls was
not seen to be particularly a problem
for boys and this way of talking of
course feeds into universities
universities have begun to actively
discriminate on the basis of sex or
gender when it comes to entrance into
some courses girls are actively courted
into the physical sciences in a way that
boys are not especially into physics and
all else being equal if the number of
places is limited as they are where two
candidates for a position in a course
are the same or almost the same on every
other metric but differ by gender well
the girl will get preferential treatment
ahead of the boy now very well but the
thing is
if all the obstacles are removed
all the inherent discrimination is gone
eliminated by removing such policies
such explicit policies and even maybe
certain behaviors that people might
engage in then humans should be allowed
to freely choose
rather than being cajoled into courses
or provided carrots and sticks in order
to rig the numbers so that they're
closer and closer to 50 50. i think it's
becoming increasingly well known but it
should be more widely known now
that in places that claim to be the
least sexist and on any reasonable
metric are the least sexist namely the
scandinavian countries places where all
the obstacles to girls entering whatever
occupation they like are completely
removed
the sex differences in job choice widens
it doesn't narrow
for example there's a bbc article i'll
link to in my substance article all
about this the fact is that males choose
this kind of area of study this academic
interest and females choose that kind of
area of study and that academic interest
but here's where at this precise moment
when allowed to freely choose whatever
they like boys and girls males and
females have these differences this is
where anyone who takes an interest in
this seems to go wrong no matter what
side of politics they happen to be
coming from
some will see that fact that there is
this sex differences in academic
interests between boys and girls and go
aha
a moral problem even when the
discrimination is removed girls are
still not freely choosing to become for
example civil engineers at the same rate
as boys are instead they're choosing
freely to become child care workers and
this is a problem so we need to
incentivize women to make the correct
political choice more often or at least
the correct choice until half of all
engineers are female or something like
this so that's one side of the debate
and on the other side we have the people
who say aha
sex differences a problem in need of a
scientific explanation that we already
have in hand the science says
male and female brains are differently
structured and therefore boys like
playing with trucks and girls like
playing with dolls hence they're going
to have different preferences in terms
of occupation which is basically what's
being said sometimes
now if we just accept it's a curiosity
and we don't fully understand why this
is going on but it's not a moral problem
that calls for us to react with policy
to a problem really is discrimination
but once that's been extracted out once
that problem of discriminating against
people has been solved why are we still
concerned about the choices that people
are making now i'm going to sidestep the
concern
that anything like occupation or
academic interest or subjects chosen in
high school should be 50 50 we could
equally look at the distribution of
ethnicity versus interest in physics or
hair color versus interest in physics or
body mass index versus interest in
physics i just don't think it's
interesting or that it matters it's
legitimate to ask the question okay it's
not off limits in other words but at the
same time the answer is of no
consequence so i think i would be with
daniel hannon on all that i think he'd
be with me however on this issue like
some others that are related
lord hannon has become enamored by
evolutionary psychology and its close
relatives parts of neuroscience now i
noticed this because i'm the fan of his
and i follow him on social media so i
tend to encounter the arguments he
invokes that rest on the assumptions
from evolutionary psychology and the
reason i bring it up is because i think
his arguments stand they're perfectly
valid without the evolutionary
psychology
more than that not only do they stand
without it they are undermined by
invoking them now it's not just him and
he is in good companies so i'm focusing
solely on the content of the ideas here
it could be anyone writing in this vein
and to some extent i can't blame a
politician who's absolutely used to the
idea that we take expert advice even one
as switched on as daniel hannon on this
topic because it is the prevailing view
in the scientific culture right now
wrong though it is
and that view is something like
the human brain is biologically adapted
and therefore the evolved physical
structures of the brain determine more
or less strongly the thoughts we tend to
have
that's the theory
and those thoughts include things like
the choices about what subjects to take
in high school which is a very strong
claim and in this particular case that
daniel hannon wrote about
we're focusing on the differences in
male and female brains rather than say
the structures we share with chimpanzees
or other primates say which is often
what underpins some of the other
evolutionary psychology stuff and i'm
going to completely ignore some
important relevant science here the same
science that the evolutionary
psychologists or those who want to
insert neuroscience into education let's
say and that is there seems to be
scientific studies out there that
conclude there are no biological
differences in anatomy when it comes to
male and female brains anyway
a follower of mine from japan helpfully
linked to an article from nature about
this
now interesting as that is it's utterly
relevant to the deeper argument which
applies whether the brains of males and
females are identical or even completely
different in structure because this is
about function and what brains are and
what they're functionally capable of not
about what they superficially appear to
look like because if a brain has a
functional capability and one of those
capabilities
allows for people to freely make choices
they do then that's the important thing
given some culture now some say on this
point when it comes to genetic
determinism the idea that genes
determine your behavior or at least
genes determine brain structure which
determines your behavior well it's not
strictly determined in the way that the
strength of gravity determines the rate
at which objects fall to earth or it's
not determined in the way that quantity
of hydronium ions determines the ph of a
solution but it's something more like
influence or shape something like that
it's a little softer than strictly
determined in the physics sense
of course we never know by how much the
genes determine behavior exactly and
most importantly most importantly of all
we do not know
by what mechanism the evolved structure
of the brain or the dna determines or
influences or shapes our thoughts i'll
say that again
we are never given a mechanism by which
this dna is able to influence our
thoughts how does it happen
absent an explanation we are in a world
of non-explanatory
science really scientism science is the
place we seek explanations if there are
differences between male and female
behavior or life choices that are said
to be genetic in origin then absent an
explanation of how the genes determine
behavior we aren't doing science we're
just guessing wildly we are saying here
grass cures the cold just try it but why
how
what's the mechanism
a hand waving dismissal of well it's
clear there are differences between
males and females genetically so of
course this is why the behaviour is
different
that does not cut it
one may as well wave a hand dismissively
to the heavens and say well there are
literally hundreds of chemicals in grass
at least some of them will be hostile to
the growth of cold viruses that's just
science
no
it's really not daniel hannon has
written and spoken a number of times
about how we evolved on the african
savannah and in places that were
deprived of abundance and for this
reason we tend to hoard stuff and we
don't like free trade see the substance
article for a link to that so the
argument goes we've got genes for
hoarding and that determines our
thoughts about capitalism that's
basically the case with some nuance now
i reject that but not because of an
irrational anti-science stance quite the
opposite i reject it because it's at
odds with our best explanation on the
topic the deepest explanation of this
these are philosophical arguments and
people can be argued in and out of
philosophical arguments we're brought up
to think a certain way about for example
economics
evolutionary psychology can claim
whatever it likes but if it wants to be
science
it can't go around violating laws of
physics and it's claiming to at least
that's the case i'm going to be making
or insofar as it is not claiming to
violate physics then it's vacuous it
just says
genes determine stuff but it doesn't say
how
the deepest explanation that is relevant
to this whole issue of male and female
brains and our evolved brains and so on
is known as computational universality
now the thing is this
people are minds they're not brains
because the mind could be running on
different kinds of brains their minds
explain things and this capacity to
explain in a human being is universal
now this is another kind of universality
i will come back to but for now let's
just focus on the mind and say that the
mind is controlling the behavior of the
person that's what a mind does the mind
is not the brain in precisely the same
way that the computer game is not the
computer the computer game runs on the
computer but the computer itself can do
a literally infinite number of things
run a spreadsheet or a word processor or
a computer game it's universal a
universal computer it can do all the
things that a computer can do in theory
our brain on the other hand runs a mind
and the mind controls our behavior and
we have a literally infinite number of
behaviors we could engage in now how
does the mind control the behavior of
the person
well it does this by taking in some
input which basically means using one's
senses to gather data which to a
populion by the way when we say gather
data includes also interpreting data now
the mind also controls behavior not only
by taking in this data but using this
data to then make some decision and to a
per period this means something like
comparing that interpretation of our
data to a theory we have guessed about
the world
and then delivering the output the
behavior now it's no mistake that this
way of describing things resembles what
a computer sitting on your desk does
because it after all is taking an input
processing and delivering some output
and this resembling this is not because
a human resembles a computer in some
ways it is because a person is
a computer in some ways and the way a
person is a computer is that their brain
is a physical system doing information
processing it's some hardware running
some abstract creative program some
software it is literally a computer it's
not an analogy and the brain like all
physical systems can be simulated by a
universal computer
if we could stimulate the action of the
brain perfectly then it would generate a
mind and i would go further by the way
and say it would generate a conscious
mind i think these things are the same
but that's another story and again here
is where many people even many so-called
rationalists pull the breaks and cease
in my mind being rational
they want to say something like well we
don't know what consciousness is
therefore we do not know if
consciousness comes along for the ride
here when we simulate minds but again
taking our theories seriously even if we
have a mystery as to precisely what
consciousness is it does not mean it the
phenomena that is consciousness can just
go around violating laws of physics
or at least that is not a good working
hypothesis that here's a thing this
entity that we know exists consciousness
and which also doesn't comport to all
the known laws of physics as they're
understood right now that could be the
case but that could always be the case
about any mystery
why not stick with what we do know and
apply it to what we don't know and see
how far that's going to get us let's see
where that leads and in this case what
we know is that the universality of
computation applies to human brains
which are known to be conscious and
therefore a simulation of such a brain
will also be conscious because
consciousness is known subjectively from
the first person perspective and
objectively because we can at least
interrogate other people and they appear
to be creative in the same way we are so
we assume it's a good working hypothesis
that these other people are conscious as
well even if we can't directly observe
consciousness because what would that
mean anyway it's like trying to observe
number in the abstract sense anyway we
know consciousness is known subjectively
and objectively to be part of the output
of functioning human brains and
therefore
a simulation of a functioning human
brain will simulate its output too its
conscious mind it's rather like if we
take a computer let's call this computer
b
and we simulate the behavior of another
computer computer a if computer b is
doing the simulation of computer a
perfectly then computer b is doing
everything computer a is so if computer
a is running a flight simulator then
computer b which simulates computer a
must also by definition be running a
flight simulator so too with the human
brain
if a human brain gives rise to a mind
and consciousness then if we take a
computer and simulate the behavior of
the human brain we will get a mind
within it now you might object to this a
lot of people do you might emotionally
feel this cannot be true you might
object that a person is more than this
you can stamp your feet as hard as you
like the thing is that this is what we
know
fallibly of course as always because of
computational universality it simply is
the case that all physical systems are
computable they can be simulated by a
universal computer this is provable and
has been proved if the system obeys the
laws of quantum theory and anything made
of matter does obey the laws of quantum
theory then a computer can be used to
simulate the behavior of that system in
principle now i hasten to add this does
not make it that system these things are
not identical a simulation of a bullet
is not a bullet as i have said before
but that is because a bullet is not
computing anything the central qualities
of a bullet are all purely physical
they're not abstract
unlike we'd say stuff that is abstract
like a song which is abstract it's a
pattern you can have the musical piece
written down as a score you can have it
recorded as a video it can be put on a
cd or it can be played live the song is
not made of atoms
stories are not made of atoms software
is not made of atoms even though all
these things can be represented in atoms
and in fact they need some sort of
physical substrate in order for them to
be represented there but all of those
things stories songs and software they
are patterns
particular patterns that can be
represented in different physical
substrates and the human mind is one
such kind of abstraction it's a special
kind but it's of a kind with those sort
of things though different too for now
it is only represented as far as we know
in human brains but there's also no law
of physics that says it cannot be
represented elsewhere in other physical
forms just as
songs and software can be because it is
software
this happens to be the basis by the way
of the argument for the possibility of
artificial general intelligence
artificial general intelligence in other
words intelligence in silicon computer
intelligences just like ours but in a
computer have to be possible because we
exist
we are general intelligence that exists
it takes a special kind of mysticism to
assume that brains our brains wet wear
or even human brains in particular are
made of a matter that is so special in
its arrangement that it cannot be done
elsewhere in precisely the same way
using other matter that's just an
assertion and it's at odds once again
with computational universality which
says that whatever can be output by that
system doing information processing over
there can be done elsewhere by some
other system in principle and the claim
our brains are not processing
information is just false you can read
this sometimes in certain articles and
it comes from this place that we don't
want we want to assume we're special but
we are we are special but we don't have
to say we violate known laws of physics
in order to be special it's not a
denigration of humans to say we obey the
law of gravity and that's why we can't
just fly at will or that we need to eat
because we must obey the law of
conservation of energy or the principle
of conservation of energy and likewise
it's no insult to say we obey the laws
of quantum theory and our brains must be
computationally universal to do what
they do because they're computing stuff
they are computers of a kind special yes
but still they obey the laws that apply
to all other computers a brain is a
physical system if you reject this then
you reject naturalism you're in a world
of mysticism and pseudoscience you
reject the notion that science as we
understand it is the way in which we
best understand the world
you are opting for a form of
supernaturalism at least in this domain
or perhaps you think well that's what
you think now but tomorrow it might all
turn out to be wrong in which case i
agree with you of course we can always
be wrong that's just fallibilism as much
can be said for anything anywhere
anytime you can't know joe biden as the
president of the united states right now
in 2022 perhaps he just died and kamala
was sworn in secretly you can't know
that trivia nights would certainly be
short affairs if all answers came down
to well that might be wrong if that was
the standard but we do know
in the papyrian sense atomic theory
might be wrong evolution by natural
selection the theory of tectonic plates
the theory of the inflationary big bang
everything we know could be wrong
two-way papillion that goes without
saying but if we want to understand
now
the best of what we understand now
about people then computational
universality applies to people's brains
as much as it applies to any other
system out there in the universe now on
top of all of this by the way we have
explanatory universality and that means
we can explain anything in principle
once again denying this just means some
things are inexplicable by us which is
the standard retreat by the way of the
religious mystic well maybe you can't
understand god or why god caused the
flood or what the universe means in some
sense or whatever question you want to
place off limits very well it's hard to
argue against those who deny humans can
understand a particular thing they're
the pessimists so long as they're not
getting in the way of the people who say
no we can solve that problem we can
explain and understand that thing then
i've got no issue of course such people
tend not to keep it to themselves they
do tend to get in the way religious
people and supernaturalists do want to
cordon off certain things certain
questions and not permit them to ask
these certain things or pursue that
particular bit of knowledge because of
who knows what supernaturalism
controlling policy and so on and so
forth now what has that to do with
anything
well the evolutionary psychologists
claim that neuronal structure and
inherited characteristics determine what
thoughts we have so hardware somehow
determines software
but this just is not true for any other
computer each year the structure of the
latest macbook pro changes a little bit
but its function doesn't it goes a bit
faster and it performs a bit better but
it's a essential repertoire of functions
does not change it can run all the same
programs it is still approximately
universal and indeed it can run the same
programs as any pc can so long as the
algorithm the program has been written
rather if it's been coded we should say
that these computers can complete any
task any other computer can given enough
time and memory human beings are all the
same in one sense
mentally what any human being can do any
other human being can do as well so why
don't we and why is this so
controversial
well it's a mixture of interest and time
life is finite and people have interest
to pursue
sure everyone kind of says they would
love to be able to do what arthur
benjamin can do if you don't know who
arthur benjamin is he's a mathematician
he calls himself a mathematician he's
worth looking up going to try to square
some three digit numbers this time i
won't even write these down i'll just
call them out as they're called out to
me anyone i point to call out a
three-digit number anyone on our panel
verify the answer just give some
indication if it's right a three-digit
number uh uh sir yes
987 squared is 974 169.
yes
good another
another three digit
another uh
another three digit number sir
457 squared is 200 5849
205 849.
very few people can accomplish the
amazing tasks he can
mentally
is this just because they are mentally
entirely incapable
no they just lack interest
if they really really were interested
and tried really really hard they could
learn the techniques if they could in
particular find out a way to make
learning that particular thing fun than
they would it's not genetics there is
nothing in arthur benjamin's dna that
codes for let's say squaring the number
1462 in his head i don't have that gene
he doesn't have that gene so what makes
the difference he can do it how
because he's learned the technique is
the technique in his dna no there is dna
for building a particular brain
structure the human brain structure does
his dna code for a structure that allows
for this
yes but then it codes for that in us as
well for anyone who can't do that
particular thing because that structure
happens to be a universal computer
running a universal explainer in arthur
benjamin's case he used his universal
brain to do a specific thing namely
become really good at a particular area
of mathematics that almost everyone
finds easy to understand as being
impressive and they're somewhat envious
of if they can't do it but the same is
true of virtuoso chess players and
pianists and
trivia champions and so on human beings
people
have this wide variety of abilities
because of the thing that does not vary
between us our universal minds
if we want to explain the differences
between us we have to explain that one
thing we have in common a mind that can
do anything anyone else can
our mind is genetically determined to do
one thing
follow its own interests and explain the
world around it and as a consequence
change those interests over time as we
learn more in a completely unbounded way
a preference for mathematics and physics
is not in the genes it is not in boys
brains more than girls brains an ability
to play piano is not to be found more in
the dna of people from that culture
rather than this culture there are
differences when you go looking
absolutely we don't know why they are
all there and is that really important
all these differences that exist between
people ethnically and in terms of gender
what is important is understanding
something far more deep than the
superficial differences between people
even if those differences appear to be
grouped according to gender and
ethnicity or whatever else
what is important is we are all people
and what a person is is a universal
explainer and that is unique in the
universe and explains why we have this
variety that we do as a species that's
an amazing quality
and it is far more poorly understood
than evolution is and evolution is
poorly understood our choices are not
determined by evolution that's an absurd
notion our choices are literally choices
we choose freely because we uniquely in
the universe create knowledge that
wasn't there before only comes into
existence because we exist we are the
cause of the knowledge coming into
existence we're creating knowledge in a
way that nothing else no other system we
know of in the universe does and so no
matter what evolution has determined
evolution by natural selection or rather
what has evolved out there in the
biological world it is only through us
we understand anything about any of this
at all
and on understanding anything at all we
can choose to do anything not prohibited
by laws of physics about that thing
genetics does not make some boys and
some girls choose to do physics
boys and girls choose to do physics
because they really are making a choice
and left to choose rather than being
coerced or cajoled and in some cases
even guilted into it which is a form of
coercion they will tend to choose this
rather than that at different
frequencies
why
because they exist in a culture and
sometimes people react to them in a
certain way and none of this is a bad
thing so long as everyone is free to
choose and it's not being coerced now
there is an interesting postscript to
all of this the tweet from daniel hannon
that prompted all of this
basically linked to his article that i'm
responding to here but the tweet itself
well it read quote there are some
aggregate differences between male and
female brains this is considered
uncontroversial by neuroscientists but
unspeakable by politicians end quote
which as we have seen may or may not be
true by the way refer back to that
nature article i linked to earlier but
it's irrelevant for reasons of
universality and it was why i tweeted in
response that quote well i said
what is correct about this argument is
not helped by scientism
brains are the wrong level of analysis
they're the hardware we are mines the
software which is universal
more males do physics but not because
their brains have a special structure
that's a red herring end quote
and in response to this david deutsch
himself remarked that quote universality
both computational and explanatory
present severe problems for some rarely
criticized institutions for example
exams poorly measure something but not
underlying merit so various corrections
are applied but given universality what
is underlying merits end quote which is
quite right as well we have this notion
with whether school-based or
university-based or the classic iq test
we have this notion they're measuring
something
in the case of the latter the iq test
i've long argued that the i should stand
for interest and not intelligence i
think that an understanding of
intelligence
really is a binary thing an entity can
either create explanations create
explanatory knowledge explicit
explanatory knowledge i should say in
which case it is intelligent or it can't
do that thing in which case it's not
this matters for things like seti the
search for extraterrestrial intelligence
now i've written a lot about
intelligence and iq tests previously
and have granted to the psychologists
who endorse these kind of things that
they are predictive but they're not
explanatory and if a thing is solely
predictive but you don't know how or why
it is again we're outside of science
we're doing something else it's science
in form only and this is something that
just plagues psychology as a discipline
at times
iq tests might very well measure for
some substantial number of people who
take the tests
interest in responding accurately to iq
test questions
look if there's one thing i can tell you
from my time as a teacher there is a
large certainly non-zero number of
people students who exist and who are
very very bright switched on but go into
examinations and tests and any
assessment at all and are utterly bored
by the whole thing they don't care the
exam does not capture their intelligence
at all it's capturing their interest in
performing well in the test i myself
have taught students in mathematics who
i have told my colleagues are absolutely
brilliant in mathematics and i because
i've seen it myself in the classroom you
know young kids who do find mathematics
exhilarating i remember this one case of
one girl she was able to do prime factor
decomposition constructing factor trees
and she could do it in the blink of an
eye with almost no upper bound on how
big the number got well not exactly okay
she wasn't arthur benjamin type level
but she was a whiz at maths at like the
age of 12 or something at taking a large
number and then being able to give you
back the prime factors of that number
very quickly
29 250 a quick flurry of scribbles on
the paper and then she'd write down 2
times 3 squared times 5 cubed times 13.
now as anyone who knows the technique
okay so it's not that impressive but
this is after having just learned the
technique at that age and even for large
numbers everyone could basically figure
it out for small numbers but she was
doing it for large ones but the thing is
this same student had absolutely no
interest in doing tests so she'd never
perform well in tests and for other
teachers as well because she spent a
large time of each mathematics lesson
doing her art she was interested in
sketching personally i never minded but
this would upset other teachers of
course so they would do things like send
her to remedial mathematics classes and
send her to remedial other classes
because why because she wasn't
performing well in tests so therefore
she needed help but why wasn't she
performing well in tests because she
wasn't interested she'd rather do her
art which is what i let her do as much
as she wanted in mathematics lessons and
she ended up doing work better in maths
as a consequence but my colleagues would
always look at me quizzically when i
said that this particular person this
girl was astonishingly talented at
mathematics so was she or was she not
well i knew she was but i also knew that
no test would ever be able to testify to
this the test was a terrible tool the
girl was simply not interested in doing
your tests or my test or anyone else's
test she'd rush through any given test
write down a whole bunch of rubbish and
cover the blank pages in sketches and
doodling
this is a creative intellect that the
school was actively harming and while i
was responsible for her sure she had
some reprieve from being told to do this
or that or the other in a particular
lesson and perhaps find some fun now and
again with something that was going on
in the lesson that's how she ended up
finding out that she liked this
particular area of mathematics of this
prime decomposition stuff so long as she
wasn't heavily coerced into it anyways
examples like that and my own experience
with iq tests tell me that these things
cannot possibly capture something like
degree of intelligence
it's something else like in the case of
iq tests on the occasion i have
officially sat down and done one and one
of these occasions was when i went to an
interview for my first ever job i think
it was like the second interview
actually i went to a
prior interview and then i got through
to the second round of interviews and it
was for being a security guard and the
head of human resources at the company
he was a psychology phd as it turned out
i think he was just finishing his phd
anyway among other things he tested
everyone with a standard iq test that
went for about an hour and i remember
thinking as i went through solving the
puzzles that oh this is fun this is just
like those other puzzles i do in books
that i behind magazines and newspapers i
read where i go to the puzzle page and i
do that stuff try and figure out what
shape doesn't belong what happens when
you rotate this one which word belongs
in this group or doesn't belong in that
group and so on and so forth so i had
fun treating it like a game but on the
other hand i also knew the feeling of
eventually getting bored at some point
now what if you were bored what if you
had that feeling right at the beginning
of the test
what if you were more nervous than what
i was going into tests like that because
at this point i was very familiar with
doing tests but i can imagine that
someone who's been out of school for
quite a while not used to doing tests
would be far more nervous what if you're
always bored and always nervous in those
situations
well then the test cannot possibly be
getting an accurate reading of your
intelligence it can be called an
intelligence test an iq test all day
long but that doesn't mean that that's
what it's measuring even if it's
predictive of you know how well you're
going to do in society and other
occupations and how much money you're
going to earn and all that sort of stuff
and especially won't capture how good a
student like i was just talking about is
going to do at particular tasks
but then here's a challenge
you want to hire someone and you need
some criteria for hiring the person and
you've interviewed a whole bunch of
candidates as much as you can and you've
looked at all their credentials and
credentials there's another story in
itself well maybe you need a proxy for
won't get bored easily by doing some
mundane task
which actually is a pretty good trait to
have as a security guard can you sit
here for one hour and just focus on a
single thing
so the iq test might actually kind of
get at that
of course you're focusing on an iq test
does that mean you can focus on security
cameras or customers walking around the
store
well i can personally tell you that no
it's not generalizable i might be able
to focus on the iq test for an hour but
trust me watching security cameras for
an hour is a whole nother story where
it's far more easy to get distracted so
the iq test isn't generalizable even for
that but then what if you've got a
limited number of places at your
university for taking people into your
chemistry degree course
how can we assess the candidates
interest in chemistry even if we admit
that we can't really measure
intelligence in chemistry well maybe
past performance is some indicator of
future commitment well that kind of
looks like induction doesn't it unless
of course we've got a good explanation
why your past performance was good
but maybe that good explanation is that
you were just pleasing mum and dad and
your teachers and so all previous high
grades in chemistry and high school are
just an outworking of that feeling of
needing to live up to the standards of
adults that you regarded as important in
your life
and once that's taken away
say at university where you're a little
bit more free you're not going to
perform so well and worse you were never
interested that much in chemistry after
all you were just interested in
completing chemistry tests to get good
grades i don't know if you remember that
simpsons episode where lisa simpson was
really upset one time because all the
teachers went on strike and so lisa
turned up at her own teacher's house
demanding to be graded and so the
teacher degrade her on some silly
criteria and when she was graded lisa
reacted as if she was a drug addict who
just received the hit of drugs she was
satisfied again for a certain amount of
time until such time as she needed to
have that feeling of being graded highly
again
so i it's a real thing i think there are
absolutely people out there who love the
dopamine hits so to speak of receiving
high marks on tests never mind whether
they're interested in the subject matter
they just like that feeling of being the
top student in the class getting the the
reward the reward for doing so well from
parents and teachers but look
you might have a limited number of
places in your chemistry course you
might have a spot that needs filling in
your chemistry laboratory
name a thing where you've got to make a
judgment call about who's going to fill
in this particular position
and if you admit well test scores are
terribly flawed but i've spoken to 15
people all of whom could fill in this
position and i can't split them except
on grades
what do i do well i don't know i've got
no good answer to that except that if
time is a factor in your life and you
need to explain this decision to someone
with let's say well they've got the
final say better grades is better than
anything else absent everything else or
higher iq scores is absent everything
else but are we really in a position
where it is absent everything else i
don't know it depends but we can admit
all of that imperfection and never admit
that actually intelligence is a sliding
scale and we might also go even further
and say actually performing well on some
examination might actually indicate
precisely something of the opposite
quality to what we want namely high test
scores might indicate a very high
knowledge about how to meet predefined
outcomes and how to learn pre-existing
knowledge and it might also
simultaneously indicate a poor ability
to question any of that pre-existing
knowledge to think outside of the box
and really make progress creatively it
could mean all of that
but for every urban legend of the genius
scientist who failed high school we've
got other examples of genius scientists
who also top their classes across the
board in every test
so there's that as well
what to do about tests and exams i don't
know clearly we must move away from all
of that in school but that's just a
special case of we must move away from
coercion when it comes to learning of
any kind forced to attend lessons forced
to undergo assessment forced to turn up
at a particular time and listen to a
particular person give answers to
questions never asked well it's all got
to go
and here on this side of the ledger that
anti-coercion side it can be two steps
forward and one step back at times but
that does mean we're making progress we
are moving forward and incremental
dismantling of a terrible system is
somewhat more palatable to the powers it
be than saying something like well in
the words of the proverbial fire sale
spruiker everything has got to go
okay that's enough for now until next
time bye-bye